# WGS Safety Assessment Project

This repository contains a reproducible workflow for analyzing whole genome sequencing (WGS) data of bacterial strains for research and safety assessment purposes.

## Objectives

1. Quality Control con FastQC
2. Read Trimming
3. Genome Asseambly
4. Genome Annotation
5. Risk Gene Detection (AMR / Virulence)
6. AMR Summary Results

## Project Structure

- `data/raw/` – Raw sequencing reads (FASTQ, not included in repo due to size)
- `results/` – Analysis outputs (QC, trimmed reads, assembly, annotations)
- `scripts/` – Scripts used for preprocessing and analysis

## Requirements

The following bioinformatics tools are required:

- FastQC – quality control of raw sequencing reads
- Trimmomatic 0.40 – read trimming (`scripts/trimming.sh`)
- SPAdes – genome assembly
- Prokka – genome annotation

Environment: Unix-based system, Java installed for Trimmomatic.

## Quality Control

Quality control was performed using FastQC to evaluate sequencing read quality, GC content, and potential adapter contamination.

1. From main folder project run:
   
fastqc data/raw/SRR2584863_1.fastq.gz data/raw/SRR2584863_2.fastq.gz -o results/fastqc

- High overall read quality, with minor drops at read ends (yellow)
- GC content mostly within expected range, no signs of contamination (yellow)
- Low-level adapter sequences detected (yellow)

2. Quality Control Summary
These minor issues can be addressed with trimming. Overall, reads are suitable for downstream analysis for genome assembly, annotation, and safety assessment.

## Read Trimming

Trimmomatic 0.40 was used to remove low-quality bases and adapter sequences.  

3. Run the following command:
cd ~/Documents/github/wgs-safety-project/scripts/trimming.sh

The paired-end reads after trimming are stored in: `results/trimmed/`

After trimming, I retained high-quality paired-end reads, which are essential for accurate genome assembly. Reads that lost their pair during trimming were stored separately as unpaired reads and are typically excluded from downstream analysis to avoid introducing noise.

## Genome Asseambly

4. Assembly with SPAdes. The genome assembly step is automated using:'scripts/spades.sh'

SPAdes produces several output files, but the main one used for downstream analysis is contigs.fasta, which contains the assembled genome sequences. These contigs are then used for annotation and safety-related gene detection.

The contigs.fasta are stored in: `results/spades/`

## Genome Annotation with Galaxy

For annotation of the assembled genome, the `contigs.fasta` file from SPAdes was uploaded to [Galaxy](https://usegalaxy.org/).  

Prokka (Prokaryotic Genome Annotation tool) was used within Galaxy to annotate genes, coding sequences, and functional elements.  

**Input:**
- `results/spades/contigs.fasta` (assembled genome)

**Output (generated by Prokka in Galaxy):**
- `strain_annotation.gff` → gene and feature annotations (primary file for downstream analysis)
- `.faa` → predicted proteins
- `.ffn` → predicted genes
- `.gbk` → GenBank format file

Galaxy automatically manages all dependencies (BLAST, HMMER, etc.), making the workflow reproducible without local software installation.  

This annotated genome is then used for safety assessment, including detection of antimicrobial resistance (AMR) and virulence genes.

## Risk Gene Detection (AMR / Virulence) with Galaxy

After genome annotation with Prokka, the annotated genome in GenBank file (.gbk) was used in [Galaxy](https://usegalaxy.org/) for detection of antimicrobial resistance (AMR) and virulence genes.

**Input:**
- `results/prokka/strain_annotation.gbk` (annotated genome)

**Output:**
- `Galaxy15-[ABRicate on dataset 3 report file].tabular` → identified AMR genes

Results: A single antimicrobial resistance gene, mdf(A), was detected in the genome.

Galaxy performs the analysis on its servers, so no local software installation or large database downloads are required.These results provide essential information for assessing the biosafety of the bacterial strain.

**AMR Summary Results**

One AMR gene, mdf(A), was detected with high identity and full coverage, indicating a reliable match. This gene is associated with multidrug resistance via efflux mechanisms.
The presence of mdf(A) suggests potential multidrug resistance, which is important for safety assessment, although further evaluation would be needed to determine its impact in the specific strain.

## Notes

- Raw FASTQ files are **not included** in this repository due to size limits (>100 MB).  
- This workflow demonstrates a reproducible pipeline suitable for bacterial WGS safety assessment.
